"""
generate_data.py

Synthetic payment-transaction stream generator with injected fraud spikes.

WHY THIS DESIGN (read this before you touch the code):

1. Transactions belong to MERCHANTS, and each merchant has its own baseline
   behavior (avg transaction size, typical hourly volume, home geography).
   Real fraud detection is almost always merchant-relative -- a spike is
   defined against a merchant's own history, not a global threshold.

2. We inject three distinct fraud PATTERNS, not a single "is_fraud" coin flip:
     - VELOCITY_SPIKE: a burst of transactions in a short time window
       (e.g. compromised card testing many small amounts fast)
     - AMOUNT_ANOMALY: a transaction far outside the merchant's normal
       amount distribution
     - GEO_DEVICE_ANOMALY: a transaction from a new device/location combo
       that doesn't match the merchant's or customer's history

   This matters because a single flat "fraud" label lets a model cheat by
   learning one trivial threshold. Multiple patterns force real feature
   engineering and give you separate precision/recall per pattern type,
   which is exactly the kind of "honest metrics" the judges asked for.

3. Data is generated as an ORDERED EVENT STREAM (sorted by timestamp), not
   a shuffled table. This is what lets you compute rolling/velocity
   features later, which is where most of the real signal lives.

Output: data/transactions.csv with columns:
  txn_id, merchant_id, customer_id, timestamp, amount, device_id,
  geo_lat, geo_lon, is_fraud, fraud_type (empty if legit)
"""

"""
features.py

Feature engineering for the fraud-spike detector.

WHY THESE FEATURES (and why order matters):

Raw columns (amount, device_id, geo) can't separate fraud from legitimate
behavior on their own -- a Rs 5000 transaction is nothing for one merchant
and a huge outlier for another. Every feature below is MERCHANT-RELATIVE
or WINDOW-RELATIVE, computed only from data available *before* that
transaction (no leakage from the future).

Features built:
  1. amount_zscore        -- how unusual is this amount vs merchant's rolling mean/std
  2. txn_count_5min        -- velocity: transactions for this merchant in trailing 5 min
  3. unique_devices_5min   -- how many distinct devices hit this merchant in trailing 5 min
  4. is_new_device         -- has this device ever transacted with this merchant before
  5. geo_dist_from_home    -- distance (degrees, proxy for km) from merchant's home location

IMPORTANT: we compute rolling stats using only PAST transactions (shift by 1
before rolling) -- if you don't do this, you leak the current (possibly
fraudulent) transaction into its own baseline stats and everything looks
artificially "normal". This is one of the most common and hardest-to-spot
bugs in fraud/anomaly detection pipelines -- worth calling out explicitly
in your "what broke" section.
"""

"""
models.py

Three detectors, compared honestly on the same held-out test set.

WHY THREE MODELS:
  1. RULE-BASED BASELINE -- simple thresholds on our engineered features.
     Every real detection project needs this: if your fancy model can't
     beat simple rules, the fancy model isn't earning its complexity.

  2. ISOLATION FOREST (unsupervised, via PyOD) -- realistic production
     scenario. We do NOT show it fraud labels during training. This is
     what you'd actually deploy on day 1 before you've accumulated
     enough confirmed fraud cases to train a supervised model.

  3. XGBOOST (supervised) -- trained WITH labels. This is the ceiling:
     "if we had reliable labels, here's the best achievable performance."
     The gap between this and Isolation Forest is itself the finding to
     report -- it quantifies the cost of not having labels yet.

TRAIN/TEST SPLIT: split by TIME, not randomly. We train on the first 10
days and test on the last 4 days. Random splits leak future information
into training (a transaction's rolling features were computed using data
that, in a random split, could come from "after" it in the test set's
frame) and would make every score look artificially better than reality.
This is the second most common leakage bug in this kind of project.
"""
What does each file do, and why (walking through the logic)

generate_data.py — creates a fake but realistic world. 25 merchants, 2000 customers, 14 days of transactions. Every merchant has its own "normal" (average amount, transaction volume, home location). Then it deliberately injects 3 kinds of fraud into that normal stream — a burst of transactions (velocity_spike), one absurdly large transaction (amount_anomaly), or a transaction from a location/device that doesn't fit (geo_device_anomaly). This exists because there's no real transaction data we're allowed to use — so we build a fake world where we know the ground truth, so we can grade our detector against it later.

features.py — raw columns like amount or device_id mean nothing to a model on their own. This file turns each transaction into 5 numbers that describe "how weird is this, relative to what's normal for this merchant":

amount_zscore — how many standard deviations away from this merchant's usual amount
txn_count_5min — how many transactions just happened for this merchant (velocity)
unique_devices_5min — how many different devices, in that same window
is_new_device — has this device ever paid this merchant before
geo_dist_from_home — how far from the merchant's usual location

The critical design choice here (worth remembering, it's a common bug): every one of these is computed using only past data relative to each transaction — never looking ahead. If you accidentally let a rolling average include the current (possibly fraudulent) transaction, your fraud detector inadvertently "normalizes itself" and becomes blind to the very thing it's trying to catch.

models.py — takes those 5 features and tries 3 different detectors, then grades all of them fairly against the same test set:

Rule-based baseline — simple hand-written thresholds (e.g. "flag if >8 txns in 5 min"). This is your control group.
Isolation Forest — an unsupervised algorithm that never sees the is_fraud labels during training; it just learns what "normal" looks like and flags outliers. This is the realistic option for production, since you rarely have clean fraud labels in real life.
XGBoost — a supervised model that does see the labels during training. This is your "if we had perfect labels" ceiling, for comparison.

It then measures precision, recall, and — importantly — an estimated ₹ cost of each model's mistakes, because the task explicitly asked for false-positive cost, not just accuracy.

